ENCYCLOPEDIA
BOOK I,
PRESENTING
HEXILOGIA, i.e., the Doctrine of Mental Habits.

CHAPTER I.
On the necessity and causes of intellectual habits.

PRECEPTS.

ENCYCLOPEDIA is a methodical comprehension of all things to be learned by man in this life. Therefore, not undeservedly, you may call it Pandects, and the University of disciplines.

It has two main divisions: first, on the precognitions of all disciplines; second, on the disciplines themselves.
The precognitions of all disciplines are an anticipated institution preparing the mind of the learner for an easy understanding of the disciplines.
Their two parts are: the first, about the nature of the disciplines; the second, about the study of the disciplines.
The nature of the disciplines is known through their variety and firmness.
The variety of the disciplines is in terms of the habits of the mind, and the types of disciplines themselves. Here is Hexilogia: there, Technologia.
Hexilogia is the first of the four precognitions of disciplines, concerning intellectual habits.
Intellectual habits are qualities that determine the intellect to perceive its objects more easily, i.e., all intelligible things. They are also called in the same sense habits of the mind and intellectual virtues.
These habits are considered in terms of genus and species. Hence, Hexilogia is general or special.
General Hexilogia will discuss the necessity, causes, and general divisions of intellectual habits.
The necessity of intellectual habits is different for the learner and for the disciplines. There is the imperfection of man: here, the perfection of the discipline.
The causes of intellectual habits are some above man, such as the grace of God; others within man, such as nature, teaching, and practice.

RULES.

I. Encyclopedia is the system of all systems, by which things worthy of man are explained with a certain method.

Encyclopedia is a Greek word. For (Greek script), it is said, as if (Greek script), that is, the world of disciplines, which used to be counted by the number of the seven liberal arts. Thus Quintilian in Book 1, Chapter 10, teaching, necessary for the future orator, the knowledge of several arts. Now about the others, he says, concerning the arts that should be taught to boys before they are handed over to the rhetorician, I think, I will add tightly bound verses, so that the world of that knowledge, which the Greeks call (Greek script), may be made. Among these arts, he counts music and geometry. Thus, Encyclopedia in this sense was a system of the seven liberal arts contained in this verse:

Language, trope, reason, number, tenor, angle, stars.

Also, with these two mnemonic verses:

Gram: speaks, Dia: teaches truth, Rhe: colors words,
Mus: sings, Ar: counts, Geo: weighs, Ast: teaches stars.

And thus, indeed, this word is strictly taken. Broadly, it signifies the composition of all disciplines, as in that Vitruvius in Book 1, Chapter 1. When they observe that all disciplines have a connection and communication among themselves, it will easily be believed that it is possible to learn the nature of so many disciplines. For Encyclopedia is, as it were, a discipline composed, like one body, of these members. And in the preface, Book 5, about his parents: They took care to educate me in the art, and that which cannot be approved without literature and encyclopedic knowledge of all disciplines. Similarly, Athenaeus at the end of Book 5 uses this word: (Greek script). And in Book 13 about Epicurus: (Greek script). But in the preface of the poet Monius, he takes it strictly: (Greek script). So also Suidas (Greek script) and Plutarch in Alexander (Greek script) take it.

But because these (Greek script) were learned by some even from the common people, it happened that (Greek script) is taken to mean trivial or common. Aristotle in Politics Book 1 (Greek script) says that it is (Greek script) such as he says (Greek script). Likewise, in his Metaphysics Book 2, he calls ordinary and familiar works (Greek script). Similarly, Socrates in Nicomachean Ethics says: (Greek script).

Again, Aristotle in On the Heavens Book 1 (Greek script), in Ethics Book 3 (Greek script) says, which he elsewhere said (Greek script). And Horace referred to this in Ars Poetica:

Public matter will be a private right if
You do not linger around the cheap and open circle.

That is, if you pursue opinions not taken from the middle, nor from the roadside. So, (Greek script) or (Greek script), if taken broadly, is for the world of philosophical disciplines, or strictly, for the world or seven liberal arts, or all common arts. But in this place, it is taken very broadly for the world of all disciplines, and therefore for the universality (Greek script), which is indeed worthy of man. Therefore, this work of ours, which we have brought back to the anvil, we no longer call Encyclopedia of the philosophical course or philosophical Encyclopedia: but absolutely Encyclopedia, that is, the system of all systems (Greek script), this is, so composed that it makes a complete system or circle of all disciplines we use in this life. Not without reason, therefore, have we said that we are here meditating on certain Pandects. John Colle the Italian calls Encyclopedia an Idea and a theater of imitation and imitability. The disciplines themselves are imitators, whose end is to imitate God and nature. The objects of the disciplines are imitable. These two are thus treated in the Encyclopedia as an idea and a theater. Hence is the Theater of Metaphysics, Logic, Grammar, and the other disciplines.

II. All teaching is from precognitions.

Aristotle rightly says in Ethics Book 6, Chapter 4: (Greek script). And again, in Posterior Analytics Book 1, he attests that all discursive learning proceeds from anticipated knowledge. This knowledge, Vives, Zabarella, and Keckermann call Precognitions. These precognitions are of two kinds, innate or adventitious, and these are acquired or infused. Acquired ones are thematic, problematic, and systematic; those and these are partial, these are total. Thematic precognitions are those which are introduced in the treatment of a simple theme; for example, if it is necessary to speak about God, it is necessary that something at least be precognized, e.g., being, goodness. Problematic precognitions are those introduced in the treatment of problems, that is, controversial questions, themselves preceding the practical arguments. For example, if the question is whether Philosophy and Theology conflict with each other, certain precognitions must be collected from the part of the subject and the predicate. Systematic precognitions are the institution preparing the mind of the learner for an easier undertaking of the discipline being taught. These are also called preludes, prodagmas, protheories, prenotions, precognitions, premises, things to be premised, etc. Furthermore, systematic precognitions are either general or special. The former are those which prescribe, in advance, about those things which commonly pertain to all disciplines; the latter are those which are proper to individual disciplines; hence, there are as many systematic precognitions as there are disciplines. In this volume, we combine general and special precognitions; both because the law of method demands that general things be explained generally and at once, and because the repetition of many things would be tedious and tedious if their precognitions were to be set forth for each discipline.

III. Precognitions of disciplines explain two things: the nature and the study of disciplines.

The main division of the Encyclopedia is that it is completed with precognitions and systems. Precognitions are nothing else than diligent preparation by which the nature and study of disciplines are taught. For more cannot be said in advance about disciplines. Therefore, Precognitions may be compared to the alphabet; systems to the digests, as they call them, or the volumes themselves.

IV. Precognitions of disciplines relate to systems, as the vestibule to the house.

Precognition, according to Zabarella, is directing and acting. It is the definition of a name, this is the thing. Both pertain to the substance of art and faculty. However, indeed, directing precognition is either total or partial. The former explains the nature and study of the discipline, the latter is the definition of a name. The former is not about the essence of the discipline but is the preparation of the learner. But you object, the nature of a thing is known most deeply from its definition, and therefore the nature of the discipline should be taught in precognitions. For the definition pertains to the essence of each art. But a ready response is at hand. Indeed, either the nature of art is precognized or it is known. It is precognized from Hexilogia, Technologia, and Archelogy; it is known from the definition of the thing. However, the fact that Zabarella makes the definition of a thing an acting precognition must be understood comparatively because he who holds the definition of a discipline has obtained not so much knowledge there as precognition. Namely, because the knowledge of the discipline turns in him so that we may hold all its precepts.

V. Hexilogy should explain the foundations of internal disciplines and their main categories; also, the habitual principles that guide the learner, and even the teacher.

Let's consider everything. And firstly, a discipline is either internal or external. The former is also habitual and conceptual; the latter is systematic and enunciated. Internal discipline is an intellectual habit perfecting and rendering a person learned and capable of skillfully contemplating or acting. External discipline is a methodical system of certain teachings about a knowable and useful matter, conveyed to educate and perfect a person. Regarding internal disciplines, Hexilogy explains their foundations. These foundations are usually the light of nature and grace. There are intelligence, synderesis, and conscience; here, divine faith. From these fountains, all that is taught and learned in disciplines flows. Therefore, no discipline proves its kind but presupposes it. It is necessary, then, to have some institution about the highest categories of disciplines. This institution is called Hexilogy, as if to say, "by six." Certainly, here, the habitual categories of disciplines are explained: such as wisdom, knowledge, prudence, and art. The source of wisdom, knowledge, and art is intelligence; for prudence, it is synderesis; for all, conscience. Finally, the principles that guide the learner are either habitual or notional. The former are the habits themselves, which are the principles of actions; the latter are axioms from which conclusions arise. The former are explained in Hexilogy; the latter in Archeology. Indeed, it is appropriate for habitual principles to precede notions, because when our intellect can operate well or poorly, all those habits must be known by which it is disposed and determined to good or bad action. Understand here the action of the mind, that is, contemplation, not the action of virtue or vices. For this reason, moral habits are not discussed here, only intellectual ones. Nor should we heed the Nominalists who are called Scholastics. They claim that intelligible species are habits that determine and dispose the intellect to operation and, therefore, do not admit these intellectual habits. But they are certainly mistaken. Indeed, the duty of intelligible species is to unite the intelligible object with the intellect as a faculty or power; this union is the apprehension of the thing itself, which is the first operation of the mind. After this apprehension follows the judgment of truth and falsehood, in which the second operation of the intellect consists. However, there is great difficulty in this matter. Therefore, there must be some intellectual habits that adhere to the intellect as a certain faculty and determine it to their operation. Furthermore, there are many intellectual habits, namely, nineteen. And all these are explained here because we contemplate the catholic or universal encyclopedia in which undoubtedly all habits must be explained that determine the power of understanding to operate well or poorly.

VI. Intellectual habits arise from four causes, namely, from the grace of God, nature, doctrine, and exercise.

In schools, it is commonly taught, according to the general opinion of philosophers, that for acquiring a habit, three things are required: nature, doctrine, and exercise, as seen in Aristotle's Rhetoric. Hence, it is elegantly said in schools: "Nature begins, art directs, and use or exercise perfects." And again: "Nature makes us capable, art makes us skilled, and exercise makes us adept or proficient." This sentiment is truly applicable to acquired habits (for according to the ordinary course of nature, these three partial causes must concur to bring about a perfect habit in a person). However, it is not similarly true for innate and infused habits. For in the latter, nature alone suffices, while in the former, the grace of God above nature is required. Thus, it must be established regarding the causes of habits. Innate habits have only one cause, namely, nature; the remote cause of acquired habits is nature and doctrine, and the proximate cause is exercise. The cause of infused habits is the grace of God. Here, one must be careful not to argue from the extraordinary to the ordinary. For it is not a logical consequence, for example, that the Apostles learned languages in an instant (Acts 2); therefore, we can acquire knowledge of languages without effort. Arguing thus is seeking the patronage of one's own laziness.
